---
layout: posts
title: "From #BlackLivesMatter to Black Liberation by Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor"
date:   2016-12-18
permalink: "/from-blacklivesmatter-to-black-liberation-study-guide/"
categories: anarchist-book-club
tags: anti-racism anti-capitalism
---

# From #BlackLivesMatter to Black Liberation
by Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor

## Introduction
The #BlackLivesMatter movement began after George Zimmerman was acquitted for the murder of Trayvon Martin in 2013, and continued to grow in 2014 after white police officers killed Michael Brown in Ferguson and Eric Garner in NYC. While the #BlackLivesMatter movement started as a protest of police violence against Black people, it must be seen in the larger context of the War on Drugs and mass incarceration. "The systematic over imprisonment of Black people, and Black men in particular, has conflated race, risk, and criminality to legitimize close scrutiny of Black communities ... This crisis goes beyond high incarceration rates; indeed, the perpetuation of deeply ingrained stereotypes of African Americans as particularly dangerous, impervious to pain and suffering, careless and carefree, and exempt from empathy, solidarity, or basic humanity is what allows the police to kill Black people with no threat of punishment."

Today the US is commonly talked about as a post-racial or "colorblind" society because explicit racial discrimination in law was overturned during the 60s. "The success of a relative few African Americans is upheld as a vindication of the United States' colorblind ethos and a testament to the transcendence of its racist past. Where there is bad treatment on the basis of race, it is viewed as the product of lapsed personal behavior and morality." The move towards "colorblind" policies has provided justification for "dismantling the state's capacity to challenge discrimination," which is a loss for white working people as well as people of color.

Income inequality has been increasing across the US, but the gap among Blacks is more pronounced than among whites. "Class differences have always existed among African Americans, but the pall of legally instituted racism in an earlier era essentially tethered Blacks together into a Black community. Today, the absence of formal barriers to Black economic and political achievement has allowed for more differentiation among African Americans and has frayed notions of ‘community'."

 "Institutional racism, or structural racism, can be defined as the policies, programs, and practices of public and private institutions that result in greater rates of poverty, dispossession, criminalization, illness, and ultimately mortality of African Americans. Most importantly, it is the outcome that matters, not the intentions of the individuals involved." The social movements of the 60s highlighted institutional racism as the basis for Black inequality. The Kerner Commission report plainly stated that "white racism" was responsible for Black poverty. However, as the movements died down in the 70s, the cultural narrative returned to blaming Black people for their own oppression and redefining racism to only refer to overt racial prejudice.

The #BlackLivesMatter movement has made it impossible to continue denying structural racism is real by highlighting many cases of Black Americans doing "everything right" and still being killed.  "The spotlight now shining on pervasive police abuse, including the ongoing beatings, maiming, and murders of Black people, destabilizes the idea of the United States as colorblind and thus reestablishes the basis for strengthening regulatory oversight and anti-discrimination measures."

"After spending the better part of his presidency chastising African Americans for their own hardships, post-Ferguson, Obama has shifted gears to focus on what he termed the "criminal injustice system" in a speech on crime and punishment ...This transformation in Obama's rhetoric is welcome, but none of it would be possible without the rebellions in Ferguson and Baltimore or the dogged movement building that has happened in between. In other words, the radical movement of ordinary Black people has forced the federal government and its leader, the most powerful political figure in the world, to account for the war against Black life. The challenge, of course, will be going from recognizing Black humanity to changing the institutions responsible for its degradation."

"In many ways, the Black Lives Matter movement, now in its infancy, is already encountering some of the same questions that confronted the Black Power movement in the 1960s and 1970s. For example: Can the conditions created by institutional racism be transformed within the existing capitalist order? Housing, wages, and access to better jobs and education can certainly be improved, but can that be achieved on a mass level and not just for a few?"

### Chapter 1: A Culture of Racism
Ideologies are not permanent, they must be constantly transformed and reproduced to stay alive. In order to maintain the common sense ideology of the American Dream, the politicians and media must continue to reinforce that individuals are solely responsible for their own poverty and lack of privilege. Democrats and Republicans consistently blame Black people for lacking work ethic and good values, and argue that the solution to Black poverty is for Black people to learn "middle-class norms". "This mythology is not benign: it serves as the United States' self-declared invitation to intervene militarily and economically around the globe. Finally, ideologies do not work when they are only imposed from above. The key is widespread acceptance, even by the oppressed themselves."

Ta-Nehisi Coates succinctly explained: "There is no evidence that black people are less responsible, less moral, or less upstanding in their dealings with America nor with themselves. But there is overwhelming evidence that America is irresponsible, immoral, and unconscionable in its dealings with black people and with itself. Urging African-Americans to become superhuman is great advice if you are concerned with creating extraordinary individuals. It is terrible advice if you are concerned with creating an equitable society. The black freedom struggle is not about raising a race of hyper-moral super-humans. It is about all people garnering the right to live like the normal humans they are."

"The long list of attributes that Reagan proudly recites is wholly contingent on the erasure or rewriting of three central themes in American history—genocide, slavery, and the massive exploitation of waves of immigrant workers. This "cruel reality" made the "soaring ideals" of American exceptionalism and American democracy possible. From the mutual foundation of slavery and freedom at the country's inception to the genocide of the Native population that made the "peculiar institution" possible to the racist promulgation of "manifest destiny" to the Chinese Exclusion Act to the codified subordinate status of Black people for a hundred years after slavery ended, they are all grim reminders of the millions of bodies upon which the audacious smugness of American hubris is built. Race and racism have not been exceptions; instead, they have been the glue that holds the United States together."

The New Deal legislation was formed because revolutionary left organizing threatened to challenge capitalism entirely. The New Deal reformed capitalism with state intervention to pacify socialists and communists who were fighting for collective ownership. The federal governments actions were designed to hide the states role in development of the middle class, allowing the idea of American exceptionalism to flourish. The New Deal benefits were largely not extended to African-American communities and Black people were kept out of suburban economy.  After WWII, competition over a shortage of jobs and housing caused an increase in violence against Black people. Police stood by as white paramilitary groups threatened and killed Blacks who got in their way.

During the Cold War, the US and Soviet Union were competing to become the worlds superpower. The obvious racism against Black communities made it difficult for America to proclaim to the world that it was a free democratic nation. Black organizers tried to bring racial injustice to international attention to leverage the desire of the US to maintain an explicitly anti-racist outward ideology after WWII. American politicians responded by defending capitalism and blaming African-Americans for their lack of ability to flourish in the free market. "Cold War liberalism was a political framework that viewed American racial problems as existing outside of or unrelated to its political economy and, more importantly, as problems that could be fixed within the system itself by changing the laws and creating "equal opportunity." Themes of opportunity, hard work, resilience, and mobility could be contrasted to the perceptions of Soviet society as being impoverished because of its planned economies, prison labor, and infringement of freedom." The Red Scare had a profound impact on public policies by weeding out government workers who were committed to a strong welfare state, and branding anti-racist activists as subversives.

"The volatile politics surrounding who should be eligible for public welfare also aided in creating the political categories of "deserving" and "undeserving." These concerns overlapped with the growing popularity of "culture" as a critical framework for understanding the failure to find the American dream. This political context, as well as the deepening influence of the social sciences as an "objective" arbiter in describing social patterns (sponsored by the Ford Foundation, among others), helped to map a simplistic view of Black poverty that was largely divorced from structural obstacles, including residential segregation, police brutality, housing and job discrimination, and the systematic under-funding of public schools in Black communities. The problem was described as one of "assimilation" for Blacks migrating from south to north." "In 1959, liberal anthropologist Oscar Lewis coined the term "culture of poverty" to describe psychological and behavioral traits in poor people ... The "culture of poverty" in its original incarnation was viewed as a positive pivot away from "biological racism," rooted in eugenics and adopted by the Nazi regime. Culture, unlike biology, was mutable and capable of being transformed ... As Alice O'Connor notes, ‘the problem was that Lewis made very little attempt to provide direct evidence or analysis that actually linked behavioral and cultural patterns to the structure of political economy as experienced by the poor.'"

Malcolm X's "influence and wide appeal across the Black North helped to articulate a different understanding of Black poverty and hardship as the products not of bad behavior but of white racism." The passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act and the 1965 Voting Rights Act removed the last vestiges of legal discrimination across the South. It immediately became apparently that "ending legal segregation and disenfranchisement in the South did not necessarily guarantee free and unfettered participation in the public and private spheres of employment, housing, and education." The same was already true in the North.

"The Black freedom movement of the 1960s fed the expansion of the American welfare state and its eventual inclusion of African Americans. Though the New Deal had mostly excluded African Americans, Johnson's War on Poverty and Great Society programs were largely responses to the different phases on the Black movement." Johnson argued that "freedom is not enough" and that structural changes were needed to ensure "equality as a result." The movement had begun to challenge capitalism directly, with MLK Jr. framing the Black community's concerns as part of a larger fight to eliminate poverty. The Black Panther Party declared it's intention to dismantle capitalism and replace it with socialism.

"Identifying structural inequality or institutional racism was not just of scholastic interest; linking Black oppression to structural and institutional practices legitimized demands for programs and funding to undo the harm that had been done. This logic underlined calls for what would become "affirmative action" but also much broader demands for federal funding and the enforcement of new civil rights rules to open up the possibility for greater jobs, access to better housing, and improvement in Black schools." Polls showed that popular opinion understood that the riots of the time were a result of structural inequality and a majority of citizens supported antipoverty programs in response.

In 1967 Johnson created the Kerner Commission to research the causes of Black rebellions. The Kerner Commission concluded that Black poverty was a direct result of structural racism and "called for massive investment in existing welfare programs to undo segregation and poverty in the United States." Johnson was angered by the report because it would be expensive to invest in the programs necessary to solve the problems created by structural racism. Both conservatives and liberals continue to link Black poverty to Black culture because to do otherwise would have two unacceptable consequences. "The first would be to fundamentally undermine America's continual efforts to project itself as the moral leader of the world ... The second would be a massive redistribution of wealth and resources to undo the continuing damage." Blaming culture allows the government to do little, since cultural change must come from the individuals instead of the state.

The illustrated possibility for a change in ideologies provides room for hope. "Ideas are fluid, but it usually takes political action to set them in motion—and stasis for the retreat to set in."

### Chapter 2: From Civil Rights to Colorblind
By the end of the 70s there was little talk of structural racism. Reagan challenged the welfare state by inventing coded stereotypes of Blacks who took advantage of welfare systems. Politicians argues that the absence of formal racism in the law meant that the state had no business in providing special help to African Americans.

The Nixon administration fought to gain confidence from the economic elites. Nixon recognized the power of the Black liberation movement to challenge American capitalism at it's core and inspire other movements to do the same. In the late 60s and early 70s the labor movement was strong, with Black and white employees unionizing and striking for higher wages together. "The tumult of social upheaval and the war in Vietnam had blown the existing Democratic Party apart, leaving its segregationist Dixiecrat wing without a home. This gave the GOP an opening to reestablish itself as the political home for conservatives, including the racist Southerners displaced from the Democratic Party." Nixon's goal was to attack the Black movement in a way where he couldn't be called explicitly racist. He designed a strategy to transform economic anxiety among whites into resentment against Blacks. He worked to increase the power of the police state in an attempt to restore "law and order." He signed the RICO Act in to law which was used to force over a thousand activists to testify in grand juries as a fishing expedition to get information on the organized left. Mass incarceration began during this time, with the brutal repression of the Attica prison uprising setting a violent example. New York's Governor Rockefeller pushed for harsh sentences for drug crime including extremely high minimum sentences for possession. Over the decade of the 70s the prison population across the country increased by more than 50%. Despite whites being the largest users of drugs, the drug laws were enforced in a way that mostly criminalized people of color. In 1973, Nixon claimed that the "urban crisis" was over just weeks before cutting the budget for all federal housing subsidies.

"It is important to understand "colorblindness" as much more than the denial of racism. Colorblindness has become the default setting for how Americans understand how race and racism work. It is repeatedly argued that the absence of racial insult means that racial discrimination is not at play. Indeed, the mere mention of race as a possible explanation, or as a means of providing greater context, risks accusations of "playing the race card"—a way of invoking race to silence disagreement. This is deployed to hide or obscure inequality and disparities between African Americans and whites. It has helped to elevate and amplify politics that blame Blacks for their own oppression. Colorblindness is a critical weapon in the arsenal of the politically powerful and economic elite to divide those who have an interest in uniting to make demands on the state and capital to provide the means for a decent quality of life. Colorblindness and "post-racial" politics are vested in false ideas that the United States is a meritocratic society where hard work makes the difference between those who are successful and those who are not. The history described in this chapter concerning the rise in class struggle, the anxiety of the business elite, the onset of economic crisis within global capitalism, and how the convergence of those different factors created an opportunity to undo the welfare state of the previous period is the context within which we should understand the emergence of the concept of colorblindness."
